---
title: "The Book of Job"
---

<ul class="nav my-3">
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./esther.html">Esther</a></li>
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./">Table of Contents</a></li>
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./psalms.html">Psalms</a></li>
</ul>

<h2 id="introduction">Introduction</h2>

This book is so called from Job, whose prosperity, afflictions, and restoration, are here recorded. He lived soon after Abraham, or perhaps before that patriarch. Most likely it was written by Job himself, and it is the most ancient book in existence. The instructions to be learned from the patience of Job, and from his trials, are as useful now, and as much needed as ever. We live under the same Providence, we have the same chastening Father, and there is the same need for correction unto righteousness. The fortitude and patience of Job, though not small, gave way in his severe troubles; but his faith was fixed upon the coming of his Redeemer, and this gave him stedfastness and constancy, though every other dependence, particularly the pride and boast of a self-righteous spirit, was tried and consumed. Another great doctrine of the faith, particularly set forth in the book of Job, is that of Providence. It is plain, from this history, that the Lord watched over his servant Job with the affection of a wise and loving father.

-----

<h2 id="popular">Popular Selections</h2>

- [Job’s Character and Greatness](./job.html#jobs-character-and-greatness) (Job 1:1–12)
- [The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Possessions](./job.html#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-possessions) (Job 1:13–22)
- [The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Person](./job.html#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-person) (Job 2:1–6)
- [Job’s Blameless Behavior](./job.html#jobs-blameless-behavior) (Job 2:7–13)
- [Yahweh Challenges Job](./job.html#yahweh-challenges-job) (Job 38:1–3)
- [Yahweh Interrogates Job; Job Responds to Yahweh](./job.html#yahweh-interrogates-job) (Job 38:4–40:2)
- [Yahweh Challenges Job Again; Yahweh Interrogates Job Again](./job.html#yahweh-challenges-job-again) (Job 40:6–7)
- [Job’s Repentance and Restoration](./job.html#jobs-repentance-and-restoration) (Job 42)

---



## Contents

- [Job’s Character and Greatness](#jobs-character-and-greatness) (Job 1:1–12) — The piety and prosperity of Job. Satan obtains leave to try Job.
- [The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Possessions](#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-possessions) (Job 1:13–22) — The loss of Job's property, and the death of his children. Job's patience and piety.
- [The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Person](#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-person) (Job 2:1–6) — Satan obtains leave to try Job.
- [Job’s Blameless Behavior](#jobs-blameless-behavior) (Job 2:7–13) — Job's sufferings. His friends come to comfort him.
- [Job Regrets His Birth](#job-regrets-his-birth) (Job 3:1–10) — Job complains that he was born.
- [Job Wishes He Had Died](#job-wishes-he-had-died) (Job 3:11–19) — Job complaining.
- [Job Wishes He Might Die](#job-wishes-he-might-die) (Job 3:20–26) — He complains of his life.
- [Eliphaz’s First Response to Job](#eliphazs-first-response-to-job) (Job 4) — Eliphaz reproves Job. And maintains that God's judgments are for the wicked. The vision of Eliphaz.
- [Eliphaz’s Response Continues](#eliphazs-response-continues) (Job 5) — Eliphaz urges that the sin of sinners in their ruin. God is to be regarded in affliction. The happy end of God's correction.
- [Job’s Second Speech: A Response to Eliphaz](#jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz) (Job 6) — Job justifies his complaints. He wishes for death. Job reproves his friends as unkind.
- [Job’s Second Speech: A Response to Eliphaz](#jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz-1) (Job 7) — Job's troubles. Job expostulates with God. He begs release.
- [Bildad’s First Response to Job](#bildads-first-response-to-job) (Job 8) — Bildad reproves Job. Hypocrites will be destroyed. Bildad applies God's just dealing to Job.
- [Job’s Third Speech: A Response to Bildad](#jobs-third-speech-a-response-to-bildad) (Job 9) — Job acknowledges God's justice. He is not able to contend with God. Men not to be judged by outward condition. Job complains of troubles.
- [Job Continues His Response to Bildad](#job-continues-his-response-to-bildad) (Job 10) — Job complains of his hardships. He pleads with God as his Maker. He complains of God's severity.
- [Zophar’s First Response to Job](#zophars-first-response-to-job) (Job 11) — Zophar reproves Job. God's perfections and almighty power. Zophar assures Job of blessings if he repented.
- [Job’s Fourth Speech](#jobs-fourth-speech) (Job 12) — Job reproves his friends. The wicked often prosper. Job speaks of the wisdom and power of God.
- [Job’s Fourth Speech Continues; Job Argues His Case with God](#jobs-fourth-speech-continues) (Job 13:1–19) — Job reproves his friends. He professes his confidence in God. Job entreats to know his sins.
- [Job Continues to Argue His Case with God](#job-continues-to-argue-his-case-with-god) (Job 14) — Job speaks of man's life. Of man's death. By sin man is subject to corruption.
- [Eliphaz’s Second Response to Job](#eliphazs-second-response-to-job) (Job 15) — Eliphaz reproves Job. The unquietness of wicked men.
- [Job’s Fifth Speech](#jobs-fifth-speech) (Job 16) — Job reproves his friends. He represents his case as deplorable. Job maintains his innocency.
- [Job’s Fifth Speech, Continued](#jobs-fifth-speech-continued) (Job 17) — Job appeals from man to God. His hope is not in life, but in death.
- [Bildad’s Second Speech](#bildads-second-speech) (Job 18) — Bildad reproves Job. Ruin attends the wicked. The ruin of the wicked.
- [Job’s Sixth Speech: A Response to Bildad](#jobs-sixth-speech-a-response-to-bildad) (Job 19) — Job complains of unkind usage. God was the Author of his afflictions. Job's belief in the resurrection.
- [Zophar’s Second Speech](#zophars-second-speech) (Job 20) — Zophar speaks of the short joy of the wicked. The ruin of the wicked. The portion of the wicked.
- [Job’s Seventh Speech: A Response to Zophar](#jobs-seventh-speech-a-response-to-zophar) (Job 21) — Job entreats attention. The prosperity of the wicked. The dealings of God's providence. The judgement of the wicked is in the world to come.
- [Eliphaz’s Third Speech](#eliphazs-third-speech) (Job 22) — Eliphaz shows that a man's goodness profits not God. Job accused of oppression. The world before the flood. Eliphaz exhorts Job to repentance.
- [Job’s Eighth Speech: A Response to Eliphaz](#jobs-eighth-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz) (Job 23) — Job complains that God has withdrawn. He asserts his own integrity. The Divine terrors.
- [Job’s Eighth Speech, Continued](#jobs-eighth-speech-continued) (Job 24) — Wickedness often unpunished. The wicked shun the light. Judgements for the wicked.
- [Bildad’s Third Speech](#bildads-third-speech) (Job 25)
- [Job’s Ninth Speech: A Response to Bildad](#jobs-ninth-speech-a-response-to-bildad) (Job 26) — Job reproves Bildad. Job acknowledges the power of God.
- [Job Continues His Final Speech](#job-continues-his-final-speech) (Job 27) — Job protests his sincerity. The hypocrite is without hope. The miserable end of the wicked.
- [Job’s Discourse on Wisdom](#jobs-discourse-on-wisdom) (Job 28) — Concerning wordly wealth. Wisdom is of inestimable value. Wisdom is the gift of God.
- [Job’s Final Defense](#jobs-final-defense) (Job 29) — Job's former comforts. The honour paid to Job, His usefulness. His prospect of prosperity.
- [Job’s Final Defense Continued](#jobs-final-defense-continued) (Job 30) — Job's honour is turned into contempt. Job a burden to himself.
- [Job’s Final Defense Continued](#jobs-final-defense-continued-1) (Job 31) — Job declares his uprightness. His integrity. Job merciful. Job not guilty of covetousness or idolatry. Job not guilty of hypocrisy and violence.
- [Elihu Rebukes Job and His Three Friends](#elihu-rebukes-job-and-his-three-friends) (Job 32) — Elihu is displeased at the dispute between Job and his friends. He reproves them. He speaks without partiality.
- [Elihu Rebukes Job](#elihu-rebukes-job) (Job 33) — Elihu offers to reason with Job. Elihu blames Job for reflecting upon God. God calls men to repentance. God sends afflictions for good. Elihu entreats Job's attention.
- [Elihu Asserts God’s Justice](#elihu-asserts-gods-justice) (Job 34) — Elihu accuses Job of charging God with injustice. God cannot be unjust. God's power and providence. Elihu reproves Job.
- [Elihu Condemns Job](#elihu-condemns-job) (Job 35) — Elihu speaks of man's conduct. Why those who cry out under afflictions are not regarded. Elihu reproves Job's impatience.
- [Elihu Extols God’s Greatness](#elihu-extols-gods-greatness) (Job 36) — Elihu desires Job's attention. The methods in which God deals with men. Elihu counsels Job. The wonders in the works of creation.
- [Elihu Extols God’s Majesty](#elihu-extols-gods-majesty) (Job 37) — Elihu observes the power of God. Job required to explain the works of nature. God is great, and is to be feared.
- [Yahweh Challenges Job](#yahweh-challenges-job) (Job 38:1–3) — God calls upon Job to answer.
- [Yahweh Interrogates Job; Job Responds to Yahweh](#yahweh-interrogates-job) (Job 38:4–40:2) — God questions Job. Concerning the light and darkness. Concerning other mighty works. Job humbles himself to God.
- [Yahweh Challenges Job Again; Yahweh Interrogates Job Again](#yahweh-challenges-job-again) (Job 40:6–7) — The Lord reasons with Job to show his righteousness, power, and wisdom. God's power shown in Behemoth.
- [Job’s Repentance and Restoration](#jobs-repentance-and-restoration) (Job 42) — Job humbly submits unto God. Job intercedes for his friends. His renewed prosperity.

-----

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-character-and-greatness">Job’s Character and Greatness <a class="marker" href="#jobs-character-and-greatness">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 1:1–12</h4>

<h5 class="themes">The piety and prosperity of Job. Satan obtains leave to try Job.</h5>

<p>There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters. His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the east.<sup title="substance: or, cattle">1</sup><sup title="household: or, husbandry">2</sup><sup title="men: Heb. sons">3</sup></p>

<p>And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day; and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.<sup title="continually: Heb. all the days">4</sup></p>

<p>Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them.<sup title="Satan: Heb. the adversary">5</sup><sup title="among: Heb. in the midst of">6</sup> And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?<sup title="considered: Heb. set thy heart on">7</sup> Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.<sup title="substance: or, cattle">8</sup> But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face.<sup title="and he…: Heb. if he curse thee not to thy face">9</sup> And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the LORD.<sup title="power: Heb. hand">10</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-possessions">The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Possessions <a class="marker" href="#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-possessions">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 1:13–22</h4>

<h5 class="themes">The loss of Job's property, and the death of his children. Job's patience and piety.</h5>

<p>And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house: And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them: And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.<sup title="The fire…: or, A great fire">1</sup> While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.<sup title="fell: Heb. rushed">2</sup> While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house: And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.<sup title="from…: Heb. from aside, etc">3</sup></p>

<p>Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,<sup title="mantle: or, robe">4</sup> And said, Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.<sup title="charged…: or, attributed folly to God">5</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-person">The Adversary’s Attack on Job’s Person <a class="marker" href="#the-adversarys-attack-on-jobs-person">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 2:1–6</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Satan obtains leave to try Job.</h5>

<p>Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the LORD. And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.<sup title="to destroy…: Heb. to swallow him up">1</sup> And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life.<sup title="but: or, only">2</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-blameless-behavior">Job’s Blameless Behavior <a class="marker" href="#jobs-blameless-behavior">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 2:7–13</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job's sufferings. His friends come to comfort him.</h5>

<p>So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown. And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes.</p>

<p>Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die. But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.</p>

<p>Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him. And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-regrets-his-birth">Job Regrets His Birth <a class="marker" href="#job-regrets-his-birth">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 3:1–10</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job complains that he was born.</h5>

<p>After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. And Job spake, and said,<sup title="spake: Heb. answered">1</sup> Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived. Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.<sup title="stain: or, challenge">2</sup><sup title="let the…: or, let them terrify it, as those who have a bitter day">3</sup> As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.<sup title="let it not be…: or, let it not rejoice among the days">4</sup> Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning.<sup title="their…: or, leviathan">5</sup> Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day:<sup title="the dawning…: Heb. the eyelids of the morning">6</sup> Because it shut not up the doors of my mother’s womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-wishes-he-had-died">Job Wishes He Had Died <a class="marker" href="#job-wishes-he-had-died">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 3:11–19</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job complaining.</h5>

<p>Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly? Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck? For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest, With kings and counsellors of the earth, which built desolate places for themselves; Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver: Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants which never saw light. There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at rest.<sup title="weary: Heb. wearied in strength">1</sup> There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor. The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his master.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-wishes-he-might-die">Job Wishes He Might Die <a class="marker" href="#job-wishes-he-might-die">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 3:20–26</h4>

<h5 class="themes">He complains of his life.</h5>

<p>Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul; Which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures;<sup title="long: Heb. wait">1</sup> Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in? For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters.<sup title="I eat: Heb. my meat">2</sup> For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me.<sup title="the thing…: Heb. I feared a fear, and it came upon me">3</sup> I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="eliphazs-first-response-to-job">Eliphaz’s First Response to Job <a class="marker" href="#eliphazs-first-response-to-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 4</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Eliphaz reproves Job. And maintains that God's judgments are for the wicked. The vision of Eliphaz.</h5>

<p>Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, If we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself from speaking?<sup title="to…: Heb. a word">1</sup><sup title="withhold…: Heb. refrain from words?">2</sup> Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weak hands. Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast strengthened the feeble knees. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways?</p>

<p>Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.<sup title="by the breath…: that is, by his anger">3</sup> The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken. The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion’s whelps are scattered abroad.</p>

<p>Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a little thereof.<sup title="secretly: Heb. by stealth">4</sup> In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth on men, Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.<sup title="came…: Heb. met">5</sup><sup title="all: Heb. the multitude of">6</sup> Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up: It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,<sup title="there…: or, I heard a still voice">7</sup> Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his maker? Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly:<sup title="and his…: or, nor in his angels, in whom he put light">8</sup> How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth? They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it.<sup title="destroyed: Heb. beaten in pieces">9</sup> Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die, even without wisdom.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="eliphazs-response-continues">Eliphaz’s Response Continues <a class="marker" href="#eliphazs-response-continues">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 5</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Eliphaz urges that the sin of sinners in their ruin. God is to be regarded in affliction. The happy end of God's correction.</h5>

<p>Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn?<sup title="turn: or, look?">1</sup> For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one.<sup title="envy: or, indignation">2</sup> I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his habitation. His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them. Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance.</p>

<p>Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;<sup title="affliction: or, iniquity">3</sup> Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.<sup title="trouble: or, labour">4</sup><sup title="sparks…: Heb. the sons of the burning coal lift up to fly">5</sup> I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause: Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without number:<sup title="unsearchable: Heb. there is no search">6</sup><sup title="without…: Heb. till there be no number">7</sup> Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the fields:<sup title="fields: Heb. outplaces">8</sup> To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.<sup title="their enterprise: or, any thing">9</sup> He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in the night.<sup title="meet…: or, run into">10</sup> But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty. So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.</p>

<p>Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee. In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the power of the sword.<sup title="power: Heb. hands">11</sup> Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.<sup title="from…: or, when the tongue scourgeth">12</sup> At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth. For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin.<sup title="thy tabernacle…: or, peace is thy tabernacle">13</sup><sup title="sin: or, err">14</sup> Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.<sup title="great: or, much">15</sup> Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season.<sup title="cometh in: Heb. ascendeth">16</sup> Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good.<sup title="for…: Heb. for thyself">17</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz">Job’s Second Speech: A Response to Eliphaz <a class="marker" href="#jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 6</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job justifies his complaints. He wishes for death. Job reproves his friends as unkind.</h5>

<p>But Job answered and said, Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together!<sup title="laid: Heb. lifted up">1</sup> For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are swallowed up.<sup title="my words…: that is, I want words to express my grief">2</sup> For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?<sup title="when he…: Heb. at grass?">3</sup> Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg? The things that my soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat.</p>

<p>Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!<sup title="the thing…: Heb. my expectation">4</sup> Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I should prolong my life? Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?<sup title="of brass: Heb. brasen?">5</sup> Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?</p>

<p>To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.<sup title="is afflicted: Heb. melteth">6</sup> My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away; Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid: What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.<sup title="vanish: Heb. are cut off">7</sup><sup title="when…: Heb. in the heat thereof">8</sup><sup title="consumed: Heb. extinguished">9</sup> The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish. The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them. They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed. For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.<sup title="ye are…: or, ye are like to them: Heb. to it">10</sup><sup title="nothing: Heb. not">11</sup></p>

<p>Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your substance? Or, Deliver me from the enemy’s hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of the mighty? Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred. How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind? Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend.<sup title="ye overwhelm: Heb. ye cause to fall upon">12</sup> Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto you if I lie.<sup title="evident…: Heb. before your face">13</sup> Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousness is in it.<sup title="in it: that is, in this matter">14</sup> Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse things?<sup title="my taste: Heb. my palate">15</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz-1">Job’s Second Speech: A Response to Eliphaz <a class="marker" href="#jobs-second-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz-1">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 7</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job's troubles. Job expostulates with God. He begs release.</h5>

<p>Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling?<sup title="an appointed…: or, a warfare">1</sup> As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the reward of his work:<sup title="earnestly…: Heb. gapeth after">2</sup> So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.<sup title="the night…: Heb. the evening be measured?">3</sup> My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and become loathsome. My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and are spent without hope.</p>

<p>O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good.<sup title="shall…: Heb. shall not return">4</sup><sup title="see: to see, that is, to enjoy">5</sup> The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.<sup title="I am…: that is, I can live no longer">6</sup> As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more. He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions: So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than my life.<sup title="life: Heb. bones">7</sup> I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days are vanity.</p>

<p>What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him? And that thou shouldest visit him every morning, and try him every moment? How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to myself? And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="bildads-first-response-to-job">Bildad’s First Response to Job <a class="marker" href="#bildads-first-response-to-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 8</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Bildad reproves Job. Hypocrites will be destroyed. Bildad applies God's just dealing to Job.</h5>

<p>Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, How long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind? Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice? If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for their transgression;<sup title="for…: Heb. in the hand of their transgression">1</sup> If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; If thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase.</p>

<p>For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers: (For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:)<sup title="nothing: Heb. not">2</sup> Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart? Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water? Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withereth before any other herb. So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite’s hope shall perish: Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider’s web.<sup title="web: Heb. house">3</sup> He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure. He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his garden. His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of stones. If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee. Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.</p>

<p>Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers:<sup title="help…: Heb. take the ungodly by the hand">4</sup><sup title="come: Heb. shall not be">5</sup> Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.<sup title="rejoicing: Heb. shouting for joy">6</sup> They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to nought.<sup title="shall come…: Heb. shall not be">7</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-third-speech-a-response-to-bildad">Job’s Third Speech: A Response to Bildad <a class="marker" href="#jobs-third-speech-a-response-to-bildad">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 9</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job acknowledges God's justice. He is not able to contend with God. Men not to be judged by outward condition. Job complains of troubles.</h5>

<p>Then Job answered and said, I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?<sup title="with God: or, before God?">1</sup> If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered? Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars. Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of the sea.<sup title="waves: Heb. heights">2</sup> Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.<sup title="Arcturus…: Heb. Ash, Cesil, and Cimah">3</sup> Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number. Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I perceive him not. Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, What doest thou?<sup title="hinder…: Heb. turn him away?">4</sup> If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him.<sup title="proud…: Heb. helpers of pride, or, strength">5</sup></p>

<p>How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him? Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice. For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause. He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with bitterness. If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead? If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my life.</p>

<p>This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?</p>

<p>Now my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hasteth to the prey.<sup title="swift…: or, ships of Ebeh: Heb. ships of desire">6</sup> If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness, and comfort myself: I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent. If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.<sup title="abhor…: or, make me to be abhorred">7</sup> For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together in judgment. Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.<sup title="any…: Heb. one that should argue">8</sup><sup title="daysman: or, umpire">9</sup> Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me: Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with me.<sup title="it is…: Heb. I am not so with myself">10</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-continues-his-response-to-bildad">Job Continues His Response to Bildad <a class="marker" href="#job-continues-his-response-to-bildad">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 10</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job complains of his hardships. He pleads with God as his Maker. He complains of God's severity.</h5>

<p>My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.<sup title="weary…: or, cut off while I live">1</sup> I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?<sup title="work: Heb. labour">2</sup> Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth? Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man’s days, That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin? Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver out of thine hand.<sup title="Thou…: Heb. It is upon thy knowledge">3</sup></p>

<p>Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou dost destroy me.<sup title="have…: Heb. took pains about me">4</sup> Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese? Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews.<sup title="fenced: Heb. hedged">5</sup> Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thee.</p>

<p>If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction; For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.<sup title="witnesses: that is, plagues">6</sup> Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me! I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from the womb to the grave. Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little, Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death; A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="zophars-first-response-to-job">Zophar’s First Response to Job <a class="marker" href="#zophars-first-response-to-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 11</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Zophar reproves Job. God's perfections and almighty power. Zophar assures Job of blessings if he repented.</h5>

<p>Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said, Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be justified?<sup title="full…: Heb. of lips">1</sup> Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?<sup title="lies: or, devices">2</sup> For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee; And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.</p>

<p>Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?<sup title="as high…: Heb. the heights of heaven">3</sup> The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?<sup title="cut…: or, make a change">4</sup><sup title="hinder…: Heb. turn him away?">5</sup> For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also; will he not then consider it? For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild ass’s colt.<sup title="vain: Heb. empty">6</sup></p>

<p>If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him; If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear: Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass away: And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.<sup title="be clearer…: Heb. arise above">7</sup> And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety. Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.<sup title="make suit…: Heb. intreat thy face">8</sup> But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.<sup title="they shall…: Heb. flight shall perish from them">9</sup><sup title="the giving…: or, a puff of breath">10</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-fourth-speech">Job’s Fourth Speech <a class="marker" href="#jobs-fourth-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 12</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job reproves his friends. The wicked often prosper. Job speaks of the wisdom and power of God.</h5>

<p>And Job answered and said, No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you. But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these?<sup title="understanding: Heb. an heart">1</sup><sup title="I am…: Heb. I fall not lower than you">2</sup><sup title="who…: Heb. with whom are not such as these?">3</sup> I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn. He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.</p>

<p>The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee: Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the LORD hath wrought this? In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.<sup title="soul: or, life">4</sup><sup title="all…: Heb. all flesh of man">5</sup> Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?<sup title="mouth: Heb. palate">6</sup></p>

<p>With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding. With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding.<sup title="With…: that is, With God">7</sup> Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.<sup title="up: Heb. upon">8</sup> Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth. With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are his. He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges fools. He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty. He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.<sup title="speech…: Heb. lip of the faithful">9</sup> He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.<sup title="weakeneth…: or, looseth the girdle of the strong">10</sup> He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of death. He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth them again.<sup title="straiteneth: Heb. leadeth in">11</sup> He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way. They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to stagger like a drunken man.<sup title="stagger: Heb. wander">12</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-fourth-speech-continues">Job’s Fourth Speech Continues; Job Argues His Case with God <a class="marker" href="#jobs-fourth-speech-continues">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 13:1–19</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job reproves his friends. He professes his confidence in God. Job entreats to know his sins.</h5>

<p>Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and understood it. What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto you. Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value. O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your wisdom. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips. Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God? Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him? He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons. Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon you? Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay.</p>

<p>Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will.<sup title="Hold…: Heb. Be silent from me">1</sup> Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand? Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine own ways before him.<sup title="maintain: Heb. prove, or, argue">2</sup> He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him. Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears. Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be justified. Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost. Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide myself from thee. Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me afraid. Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me.</p>

<p>How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble? For thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth. Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet.<sup title="lookest…: Heb. observest">3</sup><sup title="heels: Heb. roots">4</sup> And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth eaten.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-continues-to-argue-his-case-with-god">Job Continues to Argue His Case with God <a class="marker" href="#job-continues-to-argue-his-case-with-god">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 14</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job speaks of man's life. Of man's death. By sin man is subject to corruption.</h5>

<p>Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.<sup title="few…: Heb. short of days">1</sup> He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not. And dost thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into judgment with thee? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.<sup title="can…: Heb. will give">2</sup> Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; Turn from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling, his day.<sup title="rest: Heb. cease">3</sup></p>

<p>For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?<sup title="wasteth…: Heb. is weakened, or, cut off">4</sup> As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up: So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me! If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands.</p>

<p>For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin? My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity. And surely the mountain falling cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out of his place.<sup title="cometh…: Heb. fadeth">5</sup> The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man.<sup title="washest…: Heb. overflowest">6</sup> Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away. His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them. But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="eliphazs-second-response-to-job">Eliphaz’s Second Response to Job <a class="marker" href="#eliphazs-second-response-to-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 15</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Eliphaz reproves Job. The unquietness of wicked men.</h5>

<p>Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said, Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind?<sup title="vain…: Heb. knowledge of wind">1</sup> Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he can do no good? Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.<sup title="castest…: Heb. makest void">2</sup><sup title="prayer: or, speech">3</sup> For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.<sup title="uttereth: Heb. teacheth">4</sup> Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee. Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the hills? Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself? What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not in us? With us are both the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father. Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret thing with thee? Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what do thy eyes wink at, That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth? What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water?</p>

<p>I will shew thee, hear me; and that which I have seen I will declare; Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it: Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them. The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden to the oppressor. A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.<sup title="A dreadful…: Heb. A sound of fears">5</sup> He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword. He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle. For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty. He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers: Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and maketh collops of fat on his flanks. And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps. He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth. He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompence. It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be green.<sup title="accomplished: or, cut off">6</sup> He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive. For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepareth deceit.<sup title="vanity: or, iniquity">7</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-fifth-speech">Job’s Fifth Speech <a class="marker" href="#jobs-fifth-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 16</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job reproves his friends. He represents his case as deplorable. Job maintains his innocency.</h5>

<p>Then Job answered and said, I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.<sup title="miserable: or, troublesome">1</sup> Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?<sup title="vain…: Heb. words of wind">2</sup> I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my soul’s stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you. But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should asswage your grief.</p>

<p>Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased?<sup title="what…: Heb. what goeth from me?">3</sup> But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate all my company. And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face. He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me. They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together against me. God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.<sup title="hath…: Heb. hath shut me up">4</sup> I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark. His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground. He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like a giant. I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust. My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death;</p>

<p>Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is pure. O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place. Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.<sup title="on high: Heb. in the high places">5</sup> My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God.<sup title="scorn me: Heb. are my scorners">6</sup> O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleadeth for his neighbour!<sup title="neighbour: or, friend">7</sup> When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return.<sup title="a few…: Heb. years of number">8</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-fifth-speech-continued">Job’s Fifth Speech, Continued <a class="marker" href="#jobs-fifth-speech-continued">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 17</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job appeals from man to God. His hope is not in life, but in death.</h5>

<p>My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.<sup title="breath…: or, spirit is spent">1</sup> Are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation?<sup title="continue: Heb. lodge">2</sup> Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will strike hands with me? For thou hast hid their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them. He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail. He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetime I was as a tabret.<sup title="aforetime: or, before them">3</sup> Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow.<sup title="my members: or, my thoughts">4</sup> Upright men shall be astonied at this, and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.<sup title="be…: Heb. add strength">5</sup></p>

<p>But as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot find one wise man among you. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.<sup title="the thoughts: Heb. the possessions">6</sup> They change the night into day: the light is short because of darkness.<sup title="short: Heb. near">7</sup> If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister.<sup title="said: Heb. cried, or, called">8</sup> And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it? They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the dust.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="bildads-second-speech">Bildad’s Second Speech <a class="marker" href="#bildads-second-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 18</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Bildad reproves Job. Ruin attends the wicked. The ruin of the wicked.</h5>

<p>Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will speak. Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight? He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?<sup title="himself: Heb. his soul">1</sup></p>

<p>Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him.<sup title="candle: or, lamp">2</sup> The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down. For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon a snare. The gin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail against him. The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.<sup title="laid: Heb. hidden">3</sup></p>

<p>Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his feet.<sup title="drive: Heb. scatter">4</sup> His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side. It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of death shall devour his strength.<sup title="strength: Heb. bars">5</sup> His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of terrors. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation. His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off. His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street. He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.<sup title="He…: Heb. They shall drive him">6</sup> He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings. They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they that went before were affrighted.<sup title="went…: or, lived with him">7</sup><sup title="were…: Heb. laid hold on horror">8</sup> Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-sixth-speech-a-response-to-bildad">Job’s Sixth Speech: A Response to Bildad <a class="marker" href="#jobs-sixth-speech-a-response-to-bildad">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 19</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job complains of unkind usage. God was the Author of his afflictions. Job's belief in the resurrection.</h5>

<p>Then Job answered and said, How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words? These ten times have ye reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to me.<sup title="make…: or, harden yourselves against me">1</sup> And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself. If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my reproach: Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compassed me with his net. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.<sup title="wrong: or, violence">2</sup></p>

<p>He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths. He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope hath he removed like a tree. He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me unto him as one of his enemies. His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle. He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me. They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreated him with my mouth. My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the children’s sake of mine own body.<sup title="mine…: Heb. my belly">3</sup> Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against me.<sup title="young…: or, the wicked">4</sup> All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me.<sup title="my…: Heb. the men of my secret">5</sup> My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.<sup title="and to: or, as to">6</sup> Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me. Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?</p>

<p>Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!<sup title="Oh…: Heb. Who will give, etc">7</sup> That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:<sup title="And…: or, After I shall awake, though this body be destroyed, yet out of my flesh">8</sup> Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me.<sup title="another: Heb. a stranger">9</sup><sup title="though…: or, my reins within me are consumed with earnest desire (for that day)">10</sup><sup title="within…: Heb. in my bosom">11</sup> But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me?<sup title="seeing…: or, and what root of matter is found in me?">12</sup> Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="zophars-second-speech">Zophar’s Second Speech <a class="marker" href="#zophars-second-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 20</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Zophar speaks of the short joy of the wicked. The ruin of the wicked. The portion of the wicked.</h5>

<p>Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said, Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste.<sup title="I make…: Heb. my haste is in me">1</sup> I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer. Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth, That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?<sup title="short: Heb. from near">2</sup> Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds;<sup title="clouds: Heb. cloud">3</sup> Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say, Where is he? He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night. The eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall his place any more behold him.</p>

<p>His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall restore their goods.<sup title="His children…: or, The poor shall oppress his children">4</sup> His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue; Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still within his mouth:<sup title="within…: Heb. in the midst of his palate">5</sup> Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him. He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly. He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper’s tongue shall slay him. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and butter.<sup title="the floods…: or, streaming brooks">6</sup> That which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not swallow it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein.<sup title="his…: Heb. the substance of his exchange">7</sup> Because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor; because he hath violently taken away an house which he builded not;<sup title="oppressed: Heb. crushed">8</sup> Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.<sup title="feel: Heb. know">9</sup> There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man look for his goods.<sup title="none…: or, be none left for his meat">10</sup> In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every hand of the wicked shall come upon him.<sup title="wicked: or, troublesome">11</sup></p>

<p>When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him through. It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering sword cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon him. All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up against him. The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.<sup title="appointed…: Heb. of his decree from God">12</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-seventh-speech-a-response-to-zophar">Job’s Seventh Speech: A Response to Zophar <a class="marker" href="#jobs-seventh-speech-a-response-to-zophar">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 21</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job entreats attention. The prosperity of the wicked. The dealings of God's providence. The judgement of the wicked is in the world to come.</h5>

<p>But Job answered and said, Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations. Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on. As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?<sup title="troubled: Heb. shortened?">1</sup> Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.<sup title="Mark…: Heb. Look unto me">2</sup> Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my flesh.</p>

<p>Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power? Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.<sup title="safe…: Heb. peace from">3</sup> Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance. They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.<sup title="in wealth: or, in mirth">4</sup> Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Lo, their good is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me.</p>

<p>How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.<sup title="candle: or, lamp">5</sup> They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carrieth away.<sup title="carrieth: Heb. stealeth">6</sup> God layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him, and he shall know it.<sup title="his iniquity: that is, the punishment of his iniquity">7</sup> His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. For what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst? Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are high. One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.<sup title="his…: Heb. his very, or, the strength of, his perfection">8</sup> His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.<sup title="breasts: or, milk pails">9</sup> And another dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and never eateth with pleasure. They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them.</p>

<p>Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me. For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?<sup title="the dwelling…: Heb. the tent of the tabernacles">10</sup> Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens, That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.<sup title="wrath: Heb. wraths">11</sup> Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he hath done? Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb.<sup title="grave: Heb. graves">12</sup><sup title="remain…: Heb. watch in the heap">13</sup> The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remaineth falsehood?<sup title="falsehood: Heb. transgression?">14</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="eliphazs-third-speech">Eliphaz’s Third Speech <a class="marker" href="#eliphazs-third-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 22</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Eliphaz shows that a man's goodness profits not God. Job accused of oppression. The world before the flood. Eliphaz exhorts Job to repentance.</h5>

<p>Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?<sup title="as he…: or, if he may be profitable, doth his good success depend thereon?">1</sup> Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect? Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into judgment?</p>

<p>Is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite? For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought, and stripped the naked of their clothing.<sup title="the naked…: Heb. the clothes of the naked">2</sup> Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the hungry. But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable man dwelt in it.<sup title="mighty…: Heb. man of arm">3</sup><sup title="honourable…: Heb. eminent, or, accepted for countenance">4</sup> Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken. Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth thee; Or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abundance of waters cover thee. Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high they are!<sup title="height of the stars: Heb. head of the stars">5</sup> And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?<sup title="How: or, What">6</sup> Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven.</p>

<p>Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden? Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood:<sup title="whose…: Heb. a flood was poured upon their foundation">7</sup> Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do for them?<sup title="for: or, to">8</sup> Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me. The righteous see it, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them to scorn. Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire consumeth.<sup title="substance: or, estate">9</sup><sup title="the remnant…: or, their excellency">10</sup></p>

<p>Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.<sup title="him: that is, God">11</sup> Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles. Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.<sup title="as dust: or, on the dust">12</sup> Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have plenty of silver.<sup title="defence: or, gold">13</sup><sup title="plenty…: Heb. silver of strength">14</sup> For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God. Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows. Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways. When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is lifting up; and he shall save the humble person.<sup title="the humble…: Heb. him that hath low eyes">15</sup> He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands.<sup title="He shall…: or, The innocent shall deliver the island">16</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-eighth-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz">Job’s Eighth Speech: A Response to Eliphaz <a class="marker" href="#jobs-eighth-speech-a-response-to-eliphaz">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 23</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job complains that God has withdrawn. He asserts his own integrity. The Divine terrors.</h5>

<p>Then Job answered and said, Even to day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning.<sup title="stroke: Heb. hand">1</sup> Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his seat! I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me. Will he plead against me with his great power? No; but he would put strength in me. There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge.</p>

<p>Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: On the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him: But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.<sup title="that…: Heb. that is with me">2</sup> My foot hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined. Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.<sup title="esteemed: Heb. hid, or, laid up">3</sup><sup title="my…: or, my appointed portion">4</sup></p>

<p>But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireth, even that he doeth. For he performeth the thing that is appointed for me: and many such things are with him. Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him. For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me: Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither hath he covered the darkness from my face.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-eighth-speech-continued">Job’s Eighth Speech, Continued <a class="marker" href="#jobs-eighth-speech-continued">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 24</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Wickedness often unpunished. The wicked shun the light. Judgements for the wicked.</h5>

<p>Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him not see his days? Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.<sup title="feed…: or, feed them">1</sup> They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow’s ox for a pledge. They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves together. Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work; rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yieldeth food for them and for their children. They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of the wicked.<sup title="corn: Heb. mingled corn, or, dredge">2</sup><sup title="they gather…: Heb. the wicked gather the vintage">3</sup> They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold. They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter. They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor. They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf from the hungry; Which make oil within their walls, and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst. Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not folly to them.</p>

<p>They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief. The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.<sup title="disguiseth…: Heb. setteth his face in secret">4</sup> In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves in the daytime: they know not the light. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.</p>

<p>He is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards. Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so doth the grave those which have sinned.<sup title="consume: Heb. violently take">5</sup> The womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetly on him; he shall be no more remembered; and wickedness shall be broken as a tree. He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not good to the widow. He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, and no man is sure of life.<sup title="no…: or, he trusteth not his own life">6</sup> Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet his eyes are upon their ways. They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.<sup title="are gone: Heb. are not">7</sup><sup title="taken…: Heb. closed up">8</sup> And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="bildads-third-speech">Bildad’s Third Speech <a class="marker" href="#bildads-third-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 25</h4>

<p>Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high places. Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his light arise? How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a woman? Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight. How much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a worm?</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-ninth-speech-a-response-to-bildad">Job’s Ninth Speech: A Response to Bildad <a class="marker" href="#jobs-ninth-speech-a-response-to-bildad">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 26</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job reproves Bildad. Job acknowledges the power of God.</h5>

<p>But Job answered and said, How hast thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength? How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?</p>

<p>Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof.<sup title="and the…: or, with the inhabitants">1</sup> Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them. He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it. He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end.<sup title="until…: Heb. until the end of light with darkness">2</sup> The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof. He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud.<sup title="the proud: Heb. pride">3</sup> By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent. Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="job-continues-his-final-speech">Job Continues His Final Speech <a class="marker" href="#job-continues-his-final-speech">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 27</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job protests his sincerity. The hypocrite is without hope. The miserable end of the wicked.</h5>

<p>Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,<sup title="continued: Heb. added to take up">1</sup> As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul;<sup title="vexed…: Heb. made my soul bitter">2</sup> All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils;<sup title="the spirit…: that is, the breath which God gave him">3</sup> My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.<sup title="so long…: Heb. from my days">4</sup></p>

<p>Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God?</p>

<p>I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal.<sup title="by…: or, being in the hand, etc">5</sup> Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus altogether vain? This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty. If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his widows shall not weep. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay; He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper maketh. The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he openeth his eyes, and he is not. Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away in the night. The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand.<sup title="he…: Heb. in fleeing he would flee">6</sup> Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-discourse-on-wisdom">Job’s Discourse on Wisdom <a class="marker" href="#jobs-discourse-on-wisdom">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 28</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Concerning wordly wealth. Wisdom is of inestimable value. Wisdom is the gift of God.</h5>

<p>Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they fine it.<sup title="vein: or, mine">1</sup> Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.<sup title="earth: or, dust">2</sup> He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection: the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death. The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgotten of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men. As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned up as it were fire. The stones of it are the place of sapphires: and it hath dust of gold.<sup title="dust…: or, gold ore">3</sup> There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen: The lion’s whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it. He putteth forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains by the roots.<sup title="rock: or, flint">4</sup> He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye seeth every precious thing. He bindeth the floods from overflowing; and the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light.<sup title="overflowing: Heb. weeping">5</sup> But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living.</p>

<p>The depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not with me. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.<sup title="It…: Heb. Fine gold shall not be given for it">6</sup> It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire. The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.<sup title="jewels…: or, vessels of">7</sup> No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom is above rubies.<sup title="coral: or, Ramoth">8</sup> The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold.</p>

<p>Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding? Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.<sup title="air: or, heaven">9</sup> Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears. God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof. For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heaven; To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth the waters by measure. When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder: Then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared it, yea, and searched it out.<sup title="declare…: or, number it">10</sup> And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-final-defense">Job’s Final Defense <a class="marker" href="#jobs-final-defense">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 29</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job's former comforts. The honour paid to Job, His usefulness. His prospect of prosperity.</h5>

<p>Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,<sup title="continued: Heb. added to take up">1</sup> Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me; When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through darkness;<sup title="candle: or, lamp">2</sup> As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle; When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me; When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil;<sup title="me: Heb. with me">3</sup></p>

<p>When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the street! The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up. The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth. The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.<sup title="The nobles…: Heb. The voice of the nobles was hid">4</sup> When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I searched out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.<sup title="the jaws: Heb. the jawteeth, or, the grinders">5</sup><sup title="plucked: Heb. cast">6</sup></p>

<p>Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the sand. My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon my branch.<sup title="spread…: Heb. opened">7</sup> My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.<sup title="fresh: Heb. new">8</sup><sup title="renewed: Heb. changed">9</sup> Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel. After my words they spake not again; and my speech dropped upon them. And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain. If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down. I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the mourners.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-final-defense-continued">Job’s Final Defense Continued <a class="marker" href="#jobs-final-defense-continued">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 30</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job's honour is turned into contempt. Job a burden to himself.</h5>

<p>But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.<sup title="younger…: Heb. of fewer days than I">1</sup> Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished? For want and famine they were solitary; fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste.<sup title="solitary: or, dark as the night">2</sup><sup title="in…: Heb. yesternight">3</sup> Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat. They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them as after a thief;) To dwell in the clifts of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.<sup title="caves: Heb. holes">4</sup> Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were gathered together. They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were viler than the earth.<sup title="base…: Heb. men of no name">5</sup> And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword. They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.<sup title="and…: Heb. and withhold not spittle from">6</sup> Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me. Upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction. They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper. They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me.</p>

<p>Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my welfare passeth away as a cloud.<sup title="my soul: Heb. my principal one">7</sup> And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have taken hold upon me. My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews take no rest. By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat. He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes. I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not. Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thyself against me.<sup title="become…: Heb. turned to be cruel">8</sup><sup title="thy…: Heb. the strength of thy hand">9</sup> Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.<sup title="substance: or, wisdom">10</sup> For I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction.<sup title="grave: Heb. heap">11</sup> Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?<sup title="in trouble: Heb. hard of day?">12</sup> When I looked for good, then evil came unto me: and when I waited for light, there came darkness. My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction prevented me. I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, and I cried in the congregation. I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.<sup title="owls: or, ostriches">13</sup> My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat. My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that weep.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-final-defense-continued-1">Job’s Final Defense Continued <a class="marker" href="#jobs-final-defense-continued-1">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 31</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job declares his uprightness. His integrity. Job merciful. Job not guilty of covetousness or idolatry. Job not guilty of hypocrisy and violence.</h5>

<p>I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid? For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high? Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps? If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit; Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity.<sup title="Let…: Heb. Let him weigh me in balances of justice">1</sup> If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands; Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out.</p>

<p>If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbour’s door; Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her. For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges. For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root out all mine increase. If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they contended with me; What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?<sup title="did not one…: or, did he not fashion us in one womb?">2</sup></p>

<p>If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten thereof; (For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mother’s womb;)<sup title="her: that is, the widow">3</sup> If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering; If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep; If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.<sup title="bone: or, chanelbone">4</sup> For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.</p>

<p>If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence; If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had gotten much;<sup title="gotten…: Heb. found much">5</sup> If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness;<sup title="sun: Heb. light">6</sup><sup title="in…: Heb. bright">7</sup> And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand:<sup title="my mouth…: Heb. my hand hath kissed my mouth">8</sup> This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that is above. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him: Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.<sup title="mouth: Heb. palate">9</sup> If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied. The stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors to the traveller.<sup title="traveller: or, way">10</sup></p>

<p>If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom:<sup title="as Adam: or, after the manner of men">11</sup> Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door? Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had written a book.<sup title="my…: or, my sign is that the Almighty will">12</sup> Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me. I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I go near unto him. If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof complain;<sup title="complain: Heb. weep">13</sup> If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life:<sup title="fruits: Heb. strength">14</sup><sup title="the owners…: Heb. the soul of the owners thereof to expire, or, breathe out">15</sup> Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.<sup title="cockle: or, noisome weeds">16</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-rebukes-job-and-his-three-friends">Elihu Rebukes Job and His Three Friends <a class="marker" href="#elihu-rebukes-job-and-his-three-friends">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 32</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu is displeased at the dispute between Job and his friends. He reproves them. He speaks without partiality.</h5>

<p>So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.<sup title="to…: Heb. from answering">1</sup> Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God.<sup title="himself: Heb. his soul">2</sup> Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder than he.<sup title="waited…: Heb. expected Job in words">3</sup><sup title="elder: Heb. elder for days">4</sup> When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, then his wrath was kindled.</p>

<p>And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew you mine opinion.<sup title="young: Heb. few of days">5</sup><sup title="durst…: Heb. feared">6</sup> I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding. Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment. Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion. Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst ye searched out what to say.<sup title="reasons: Heb. understandings">7</sup><sup title="what…: Heb. words">8</sup> Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words: Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man. Now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will I answer him with your speeches.<sup title="directed: or, ordered">9</sup></p>

<p>They were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.<sup title="left…: Heb. removed speeches from themselves">10</sup> When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and answered no more;) I said, I will answer also my part, I also will shew mine opinion. For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.<sup title="matter: Heb. words">11</sup><sup title="spirit…: Heb. spirit of my belly">12</sup> Behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles.<sup title="hath…: Heb. is not opened">13</sup> I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and answer.<sup title="be…: Heb. breathe">14</sup> Let me not, I pray you, accept any man’s person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man. For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker would soon take me away.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-rebukes-job">Elihu Rebukes Job <a class="marker" href="#elihu-rebukes-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 33</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu offers to reason with Job. Elihu blames Job for reflecting upon God. God calls men to repentance. God sends afflictions for good. Elihu entreats Job's attention.</h5>

<p>Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my words. Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my mouth.<sup title="in my mouth: Heb. in my palate">1</sup> My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly. The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life. If thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up. Behold, I am according to thy wish in God’s stead: I also am formed out of the clay.<sup title="wish: Heb. mouth">2</sup><sup title="formed: Heb. cut">3</sup> Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.</p>

<p>Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,<sup title="hearing: Heb. ears">4</sup> I am clean without transgression, I am innocent; neither is there iniquity in me. Behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his enemy, He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths. Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is greater than man. Why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of any of his matters.<sup title="he giveth…: Heb. he answereth not">5</sup></p>

<p>For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; Then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction,<sup title="he…: Heb. he revealeth, or, uncovereth">6</sup> That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.<sup title="purpose: Heb. work">7</sup> He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.<sup title="from perishing: Heb. from passing">8</sup></p>

<p>He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain: So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soul dainty meat.<sup title="dainty…: Heb. meat of desire">9</sup> His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones that were not seen stick out. Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness: Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.<sup title="a ransom: or, an atonement">10</sup> His flesh shall be fresher than a child’s: he shall return to the days of his youth:<sup title="a child’s: Heb. childhood">11</sup> He shall pray unto God, and he will be favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness. He looketh upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not;<sup title="He…: or, He shall look upon men, and say">12</sup> He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.<sup title="He…: or, He hath delivered my soul, etc, and my life">13</sup></p>

<p>Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man,<sup title="oftentimes: Heb. twice and thrice">14</sup> To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I will speak. If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify thee. If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-asserts-gods-justice">Elihu Asserts God’s Justice <a class="marker" href="#elihu-asserts-gods-justice">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 34</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu accuses Job of charging God with injustice. God cannot be unjust. God's power and providence. Elihu reproves Job.</h5>

<p>Furthermore Elihu answered and said, Hear my words, O ye wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge. For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.<sup title="mouth: Heb. palate">1</sup> Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is good. For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my judgment. Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without transgression.<sup title="my wound: Heb. mine arrow">2</sup> What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water? Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men. For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should delight himself with God.</p>

<p>Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: far be it from God, that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.<sup title="men…: Heb. men of heart">3</sup> For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways. Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment. Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed the whole world?<sup title="the whole: Heb. all of it?">4</sup> If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit and his breath;<sup title="man: Heb. him">5</sup> All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.</p>

<p>If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of my words. Shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn him that is most just?<sup title="govern: Heb. bind?">6</sup> Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly? How much less to him that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? for they all are the work of his hands. In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without hand.<sup title="the mighty…: Heb. they shall take away the mighty">7</sup> For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings. There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. For he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should enter into judgment with God.<sup title="enter: Heb. go">8</sup> He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their stead.<sup title="number: Heb. searching out">9</sup> Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed.<sup title="destroyed: Heb. crushed">10</sup> He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;<sup title="open…: Heb. place of beholders">11</sup> Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways:<sup title="him: Heb. after him">12</sup> So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted. When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only: That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.</p>

<p>Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I see not teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore speak what thou knowest.<sup title="according…: Heb. from with thee?">13</sup> Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.<sup title="of…: Heb. of heart">14</sup> Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom. My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his answers for wicked men.<sup title="My…: or, My father, let Job be tried">15</sup> For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-condemns-job">Elihu Condemns Job <a class="marker" href="#elihu-condemns-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 35</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu speaks of man's conduct. Why those who cry out under afflictions are not regarded. Elihu reproves Job's impatience.</h5>

<p>Elihu spake moreover, and said, Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou saidst, My righteousness is more than God’s? For thou saidst, What advantage will it be unto thee? and, What profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?<sup title="if…: or, by it more than by my sin">1</sup> I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.<sup title="answer…: Heb. return to thee words">2</sup> Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds which are higher than thou. If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art; and thy righteousness may profit the son of man.</p>

<p>By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty. But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the night; Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven? There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.</p>

<p>Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou in him. But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he knoweth it not in great extremity:<sup title="he hath: that is, God hath">3</sup><sup title="he knoweth: that is, Job knoweth">4</sup> Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-extols-gods-greatness">Elihu Extols God’s Greatness <a class="marker" href="#elihu-extols-gods-greatness">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 36</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu desires Job's attention. The methods in which God deals with men. Elihu counsels Job. The wonders in the works of creation.</h5>

<p>Elihu also proceeded, and said, Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee that I have yet to speak on God’s behalf.<sup title="I have…: Heb. there are yet words for God">1</sup> I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.</p>

<p>Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom.<sup title="wisdom: Heb. heart">2</sup> He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the poor.<sup title="poor: or, afflicted">3</sup> He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction; Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded. He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.<sup title="perish: Heb. pass away">4</sup> But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he bindeth them. They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.<sup title="They…: Heb. Their soul dieth">5</sup><sup title="unclean: or, sodomites">6</sup></p>

<p>He delivereth the poor in his affliction, and openeth their ears in oppression.<sup title="poor: or, afflicted">7</sup> Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place, where there is no straitness; and that which should be set on thy table should be full of fatness.<sup title="that…: Heb. the rest of thy table">8</sup> But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.<sup title="take…: or, should uphold thee">9</sup> Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.<sup title="deliver…: Heb. turn thee aside">10</sup> Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of strength. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place. Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather than affliction. Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him? Who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity?</p>

<p>Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold. Every man may see it; man may behold it afar off. Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out. For he maketh small the drops of water: they pour down rain according to the vapour thereof: Which the clouds do drop and distil upon man abundantly. Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle? Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it, and covereth the bottom of the sea.<sup title="bottom: Heb. roots">11</sup> For by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance. With clouds he covereth the light; and commandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt. The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattle also concerning the vapour.<sup title="the vapour: Heb. that which goeth up">12</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="elihu-extols-gods-majesty">Elihu Extols God’s Majesty <a class="marker" href="#elihu-extols-gods-majesty">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 37</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Elihu observes the power of God. Job required to explain the works of nature. God is great, and is to be feared.</h5>

<p>At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth out of his mouth.<sup title="Hear…: Heb. Hear in hearing">1</sup> He directeth it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth.<sup title="lightning: Heb. light">2</sup><sup title="ends: Heb. wings">3</sup> After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his excellency; and he will not stay them when his voice is heard. God thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend.</p>

<p>For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.<sup title="likewise…: Heb. and to the shower of rain, and to the showers of rain of his strength">4</sup> He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work. Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places. Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.<sup title="south: Heb. chamber">5</sup><sup title="north: Heb. scattering winds">6</sup> By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is straitened. Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his bright cloud:<sup title="his…: Heb. the cloud of his light">7</sup> And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world in the earth. He causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or for mercy.<sup title="correction: Heb. a rod">8</sup></p>

<p>Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God. Dost thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine? Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge? How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind? Hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass? Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness. Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.</p>

<p>And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them. Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God is terrible majesty.<sup title="Fair…: Heb. Gold">9</sup> Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict. Men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise of heart.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="yahweh-challenges-job">Yahweh Challenges Job <a class="marker" href="#yahweh-challenges-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 38:1–3</h4>

<h5 class="themes">God calls upon Job to answer.</h5>

<p>Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said, Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.<sup title="answer…: Heb. make me know">1</sup></p>

<h2 class="heading" id="yahweh-interrogates-job">Yahweh Interrogates Job; Job Responds to Yahweh <a class="marker" href="#yahweh-interrogates-job">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 38:4–40:2</h4>

<h5 class="themes">God questions Job. Concerning the light and darkness. Concerning other mighty works. Job humbles himself to God.</h5>

<p>Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.<sup title="hast…: Heb. knowest understanding">1</sup> Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;<sup title="foundations: Heb. sockets">2</sup><sup title="fastened: Heb. made to sink?">3</sup> When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy? Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb? When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it, And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,<sup title="brake…: or, established my decree upon it">4</sup> And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?<sup title="thy…: Heb. the pride of thy waves">5</sup></p>

<p>Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days; and caused the dayspring to know his place; That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it?<sup title="ends: Heb. wings">6</sup> It is turned as clay to the seal; and they stand as a garment. And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm shall be broken. Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of the depth? Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or hast thou seen the doors of the shadow of death? Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou knowest it all. Where is the way where light dwelleth? and as for darkness, where is the place thereof, That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?<sup title="to the bound: or, at, etc">7</sup> Knowest thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number of thy days is great? Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war? By what way is the light parted, which scattereth the east wind upon the earth?</p>

<p>Who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder; To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the wilderness, wherein there is no man; To satisfy the desolate and waste ground; and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth? Hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew? Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it? The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.<sup title="is…: Heb. is taken">8</sup> Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?<sup title="Pleiades: or, the seven stars: Heb. Cimah">9</sup><sup title="Orion: Heb. Cesil?">10</sup> Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?<sup title="Mazzaroth: or, the twelve signs">11</sup><sup title="guide: Heb. guide them">12</sup> Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee? Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?<sup title="Here…: Heb. Behold us?">13</sup> Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart? Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of heaven,<sup title="stay: Heb. cause to lie down">14</sup> When the dust groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?<sup title="groweth…: or, is turned into mire: Heb. is poured">15</sup> Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the young lions,<sup title="the appetite: Heb. the life">16</sup> When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait? Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat.</p>

<p>Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve? Canst thou number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they bring forth? They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their sorrows. Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they go forth, and return not unto them. Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass? Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.<sup title="barren…: Heb. salt places">17</sup> He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth he the crying of the driver.<sup title="of the driver: Heb. of the exactor">18</sup> The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing. Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib? Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee? Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy labour to him? Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?</p>

<p>Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich?<sup title="wings and…: or, the feathers of the stork and ostrich">19</sup> Which leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust, And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers: her labour is in vain without fear; Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her understanding. What time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and his rider.</p>

<p>Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.<sup title="terrible: Heb. terror">20</sup> He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed men.<sup title="He paweth: or, His feet dig">21</sup><sup title="the armed…: Heb. the armour">22</sup> He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet. He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.</p>

<p>Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south? Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?<sup title="at…: Heb. by thy mouth">23</sup> She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place. From thence she seeketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar off. Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is she.</p>

<p>Moreover the LORD answered Job, and said, Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it.</p>

<p>Then Job answered the LORD, and said, Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken; but I will not answer: yea, twice; but I will proceed no further.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="yahweh-challenges-job-again">Yahweh Challenges Job Again; Yahweh Interrogates Job Again <a class="marker" href="#yahweh-challenges-job-again">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 40:6–7</h4>

<h5 class="themes">The Lord reasons with Job to show his righteousness, power, and wisdom. God's power shown in Behemoth.</h5>

<p>Then answered the LORD unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said, Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me. Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous? Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like him? Deck thyself now with majesty and excellency; and array thyself with glory and beauty. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and abase him. Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place. Hide them in the dust together; and bind their faces in secret. Then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can save thee.</p>

<p>Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.<sup title="behemoth: probably an extinct animal of some kind">1</sup> Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his belly. He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped together.<sup title="He…: or, He setteth up">2</sup> His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of iron. He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his sword to approach unto him. Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play. He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens. The shady trees cover him with their shadow; the willows of the brook compass him about. Behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.<sup title="he drinketh up: Heb. he oppresseth">3</sup> He taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth through snares.<sup title="He…: or, Will any take him in his sight, or, bore his nose with a gin?">4</sup></p>

<p>Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down?<sup title="leviathan: probably an extinct animal of some kind">5</sup><sup title="which…: Heb. which thou drownest?">6</sup> Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn? Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee? Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever? Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens? Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the merchants? Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears? Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more. Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him? None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me?</p>

<p>Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion. Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?<sup title="with: or, within">7</sup> Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about. His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.<sup title="scales: Heb. strong pieces of shields">8</sup> One is so near to another, that no air can come between them. They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundered. By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron. His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth. In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.<sup title="is turned into joy: Heb. rejoiceth">9</sup> The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.<sup title="flakes: Heb. fallings">10</sup> His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether millstone. When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves. The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.<sup title="habergeon: or, breastplate">11</sup> He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble. Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear. Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.<sup title="Sharp stones: Heb. Sharp pieces of potsherd">12</sup> He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment. He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary. Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.<sup title="is made without fear: or, behave themselves without fear">13</sup> He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride.</p>

<h2 class="heading" id="jobs-repentance-and-restoration">Job’s Repentance and Restoration <a class="marker" href="#jobs-repentance-and-restoration">¶</a></h2>

<h4 class="passage">Job 42</h4>

<h5 class="themes">Job humbly submits unto God. Job intercedes for his friends. His renewed prosperity.</h5>

<p>Then Job answered the LORD, and said, I know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee.<sup title="no thought can be…: or, no thought of thine can be hindered">1</sup> Who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee. Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.</p>

<p>And it was so, that after the LORD had spoken these words unto Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath. Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you: for him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.<sup title="him: Heb. his face, or, person">2</sup> So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according as the LORD commanded them: the LORD also accepted Job.<sup title="Job: Heb. the face of Job">3</sup></p>

<p>And the LORD turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before.<sup title="gave…: Heb. added all that had been to Job unto the double">4</sup> Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the LORD had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold. So the LORD blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses. He had also seven sons and three daughters. And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Keren-happuch. And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren. After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons’ sons, even four generations. So Job died, being old and full of days.</p>

<ul class="nav my-3">
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./esther.html">Esther</a></li>
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./">Table of Contents</a></li>
  <li class="nav-item"><a class="nav-link" href="./psalms.html">Psalms</a></li>
</ul>

---

<div class="small-print">

<p>Scripture text is from the King James Version (KJV) or Authorized Version of
the Holy Bible, using the standardized text of 1769, courtesy of <a
href="https://ebible.org/kjv/">ebible.org</a>.</p>

<p>Public Domain, except in the United Kingdom. Letters patent issued by King
James with no expiration date means that to print this translation in the
United Kingdom or import printed copies into the UK, you need
permission. Currently, the Cambridge University Press, the Oxford University
Press, and Collins have the exclusive right to print this Bible translation in
the UK. This royal decree has no effect outside of the UK, where this work is
firmly in the Public Domain. Please see
<a href="http://www.cambridge.org/about-us/who-we-are/queens-printers-patent">Cambridge University Press</a>
and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_James_Version#Copyright_status">Wikipedia</a>
for more information.</p>

<p>Section headings are from the
<a href="http://LexhamEnglishBible.com">Lexham English Bible</a>.
Copyright 2012 <a href="http://logos.com">Logos Bible Software</a>. Lexham is a
registered trademark of Logos Bible Software. Section headings are specifically
exempt from the site-wide Creative Commons License, and are used only
<a href="http://lexhamenglishbible.com/license/">with special permission</a> from
Logos Bible Software.</p>

<p>Book introductions and section themes are from <cite>Matthew Henry's Concise
Commentary on the Bible</cite>, courtesy of
<a href="https://www.ccel.org/ccel/henry/mhcc">Christian Classics Ethereal Library</a>.
Public Domain.</p>

<p>"Popular Selections" based on <a href="https://www.openbible.info/labs/kids-bible-stories/">Most-Popular Kids’ Bible Stories</a> courtesy of <a href="https://www.openbible.info/">OpenBible.info</a>.</p>

</div>